Hello everyone, welcome to an exciting talk.
So today we'll be discussing about this talk, which is When Rivers Speak, Analyzing Massive
Water Quality Datasets Using SSH in Positron.
So Roger Gers is a Cure A engineer at Poseidon, so stay tuned and follow this exciting talk.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Yeah.
And yeah, so my talk today is When Rivers Speak, Analyzing Massive Water Quality Datasets Using
Remote SSH in Positron.
My name is Rodrigo.
A little bit about myself, just to start with.
I'm a Cure Engineer at Posit, and I'm originally from Salvador, Brazil.
That's my city, by the way.
But I'm based in Pittsburgh.
My background is actually in chemistry, so it's very exciting actually to be at PyData
Boston with the Python community, because then I can get to learn a lot from the different
talks and so on from everyone.
My main interests lie at the intersection of statistics, data, and society, especially
with how to use data and statistics to understand and improve the world.
That's the overarching theme of many of my talks, and that's related to what I'll be
presenting today.
Throughout the talk, if anyone has any questions, please feel free to interrupt.
I really don't mind.
So yeah.
So just an overview of the presentation, I'll start by talking about rivers as storytellers
of human history.
Then I'll dive more into the U.S. Geological Survey sensor network.
And then we'll talk more about the technical aspects of how to take advantage of all those
massive pieces of data that are available through APIs.
And then we'll talk more about remote station positron as a potential solution to enable
capturing and making sense of all of this data.
And then in conclusion, I'll just wrap up with how data science can be a tool for a
better world.
So beginning with rivers as storytellers, that's something that I became very interested
in as a chemist, who is also interested in the statistics part of things.
So this is a map of the U.S. with all rivers that someone used open source data from the
National Hydrography Dataset in order to capture all of this.
And in terms of rivers, what really makes me very fascinated about them is their ability
to record several dimensions of human history from migration patterns to industrialization,
ecological resilience, inequality, neglect, and environmental deregulation or regulation
and so on.
So just as an example, that's a historical map of the Delaware River showcasing the route
that George Washington's troops went through.
So that idea of rivers as storytellers of societies and of human history has always
interested me.
And that's part of the reason why I decided to talk about this today.
And more particularly, along with that theme of rivers as storytellers, I was always fascinated
by the amount of data that's produced, especially here in the United States, from these rivers.
I live in Pittsburgh, and Pittsburgh has essentially the beginning of the Ohio River.
There are two rivers, the Alangany and the Monongahela River, that get together, forming
the Ohio River.
And the Ohio River has actually been used for a lot of mathematical modeling in terms
of like pollution and patterns of rivers, just because of the pollution that goes into
it, unfortunately.
So that's what I was interested as well, about the idea of capturing that data from
U.S. Geological Survey in order to try to understand patterns of those rivers.
And in terms of the size of that network, the United States has one of the largest environmental
monitoring systems in the world, with over 2.3 million sites spread all over the country.
And many of those sites are capturing data every 15 minutes.
The one they station at the beginning of the Ohio River, for example, it captures a bunch
of water quality parameters every 15 minutes.
And there is an API streaming that data as we speak, leading to hundreds of millions
of measurements, as well as several years of data.
Some of the more recent data is more complete.
However, even in the past, there has been some data being streamed from those stations.
Which leads to two questions.
Why should we care about river data?
As well as how can we listen to these massive amounts of data that rivers have been sharing?
And to answer the first question, I think water quality data reveals a lot of things
that are of societal concern, including shifts in regulation, political priorities, economic
development, environmental justice, and climate transformations, in a way that data is not
just numbers, but the social history that encodes a lot of aspects of our societies.
So that's why I became more and more interested in that.
And in terms of how can we listen to the data that rivers are sharing, that is a challenge.
Because both in terms of computation, as well as storage, and so on, it's difficult
to be able to capture the magnitude of that data and to be able to process it and analyze
it and so on.
So that's what made me really intrigued by that problem.
Which leads to us talking about the technical overview of what we'll do today.
So the first step was to fetch the national data, a national site index.
That national site index contains the number that's assigned for each of those sites that
are spread all over the United States.
And the reason why we have to be very strategic about how to fetch is because those numbers
are together with a massive amount of data.
And a lot of those APIs are quite old.
So it's difficult to be able to process all of that and to have a correlation between
each number and each site.
And there's no very accessible way to see here's a list of all numbers and all sites.
You really have to make API calls and so on to the USGS water services API.
And then we'll go through the sink ingestion of three years of data.
We are only doing three years because just three years is already massive.
We could go to 30 years of data and see what happens.
One caveat though is that some of the data for some stations only became available recently.
So that's the tricky part.
So there could be a high level of missingness in some stations and so on.
So that's what the third topic is, scaling to 30 years.
And then followed by structuring the big data with Parquet or DuckDB.
And then finally interpreting environmental time series as a sociological and historical
evidence.
Any questions so far that anyone has?
Yeah, go ahead.
Where does this data live?
Do you need to continuously record it or is it there's some government servers you need
to find?
Yeah.
So the question was where the data lives.
So there's the USGS API water services API that you can make calls to.
And that data is being in a lot of stations it's being streamed every 15 minutes for example.
If anyone wants to explore more of this data, just a heads up that I think in January 2026
a lot of the API endpoints are being deprecated, which makes that whole idea of exploring those
data sets extremely relevant and pressing in terms of time.
And it's easy to assume that someone out there is doing it.
And I hope so.
But just in case I've saved parts of the data set in my machine.
So in terms, so the first part about fetching the national site index, there is a large
inventory of more than 1.7 million rows after processing.
And then doing some cleaning, the duplication and filtering of the stream sites, which results
in the master table for the, that helps with the downstream workflow.
I can show this part later.
I think that would be easier so that we don't have to switch between applications now.
But the idea is to use those values as part of the national site indexes as parameters
to make the API calls to the four different water quality parameters that I'm interested
in.
And those four different water quality parameters are listed here in this table, temperature,
specific conductance, dissolved oxygen and pH.
And each of them I find interesting because they reveal patterns around pollution, industrial
activity, weather and so on.
And all of this is very important for the wildlife that lives in the river and in the
surrounding areas of the river as well.
And for us as well, we are also part of nature.
So that's actually important to have, to monitor those parameters and so on.
This is a caveat though, there are a bunch of other parameters and some of them are actually
very important to prevent or to plan for flooding.
For example, there are some rivers in the US where there's flooding in the surrounding
regions from time to time.
So they do have parameters related to the height of the river and so on.
So in terms of temperature, very high values can stress the aquatic life, very low values
can slow the metabolism of the organisms living there.
The specific conductance is typically correlated with clean or polluted water.
Low values would indicate that typically the water is clean.
High values could indicate some pollution from industry and so on.
Dissolved oxygen is one of the main ways also to quantify pollution because if you have
very low dissolved oxygen, it usually indicates that zones and fish kills, whereas high dissolved
oxygen usually indicates a healthy ecosystem.
And finally the pH can indicate possible contamination or mineral imbalance in the water, which can
cause some stress to the species and so on.
So then in terms of the ingestion of those four parameters, there are thousands of sites
for each state.
Some cities might have even multiple sites where data is being collected, and leading
to millions of rows per ingestion batch.
And by ingestion batch here, I mean that in the way I plan the ingestion, I decided to
do it by state.
And then using a sync request and thread post to speed up the process is also helpful, which
leads to producing the state-level Parquet partitions.
And in the end, just three years of data, four parameters, leads to 1.8 gigabytes of
Parquet data.
If you do it in CSV instead, it's much larger.
If you decide to collect the other parameters, it would also increase massively, along with
expanding the year window would also lead to massive expansion.
I will show that data after in the positron application.
And then I was thinking, just as a planning for potential future exploration, what would
be like to scale for 30 years of data if there was a feasible way to outgrow laptops' limitations.
The reason why I say that is because although many of us do have machines that can process
a lot of data and can collect at scale and so on, sometimes if you have limitations in
terms of equipment, in terms of computing capacity, even tasks that we are used to in
terms of data collection and processing can be a challenge.
Even for three years of data, collecting the data without just with my machine, for example,
it took about 70 minutes of running it continuously.
And during that collection, there's always the ethical considerations behind it as well
of making sure that you are not stressing servers, especially from government infrastructure
and so on.
So all of this is very important to consider.
And we have tens of millions of rows of sensor data if we were to go through 30 years, for
example.
And if we scale up more than four parameters, that would also lead to several more columns.
And I think there was someone who spoke earlier today about how columns really constitute
a challenge for data processing capabilities and so on.
And besides memory limits, some people can also be limited by storage.
And that's how remote SSH can help overcome some of these gaps.
Any questions up to this point?
No?
OK, cool.
So let's jump on to how remote SSH can be a solution to some of these challenges.
So I'll start by explaining how it works in a higher level view.
So in terms of compute and storage, there are different types of providers that can
provide virtual machines and so on so that we can remote into those virtual machines.
If anyone, and in my talks, I always like to give ideas so that people can try it themselves
for free.
I usually don't like to, oh, let me recommend this provider or that provider.
There are a bunch out there that are giving free trials and credits and so on.
So if you want to try remote SSH with Positron and you need a VM or a provider, you can just
look it up for the ones that have free credits available.
Some of them have very generous free trials.
So yeah, that can be a good option.
And what remote SSH in Positron provides is a local UI with the ability to do remote computing.
And that's very helpful because you're able to take advantage of Positron's capabilities
and the UI while outgrowing your computer's resources and so on.
And what I find really good as well is to pair the expansion of computing capabilities
with other good practices when it comes to large data sets, such as using Parquet files,
for example, which are fully supported within the Data Explorer and so on, which I'll show
later as well.
And lastly, that can help with a scalable network throughput for async ingestion pipelines,
which is what we have today.
One caveat, though, is that, of course, when you are making API calls, there are limitations
that are beyond your control.
And you also don't want to stress external servers and so on.
Yeah, so I already explained some of these reasons why to use remote SSH in Positron
in terms of offloading some of the heavy data collection and processing work to a remote
server, keeping the laptop responsive, having the workflow that data scientists usually
like within Positron, and doing the long-running ingestion jobs and so on.
And I think now it's a good time to actually show some of the UI and how these different
factors are factored into the Positron's remote SSH.
So with that, I put some screenshots of different areas of the application.
The first one I would like to highlight here is that you can pre-configure specific hosts
so that you can connect to the desired host.
So once you click Connect to Host, there will be a list of your pre-configured hosts.
And then you can just go ahead and connect to it.
This is very helpful if you have multiple remote environments, because sometimes people,
for example, might set up one VM, one box for light tasks and another one for very heavy
tasks.
And since you're paying by the hour, you don't want necessarily to be using the wrong one
for the wrong type of need that you have.
So that's how you can connect to the host.
Once you're connected, there is a very clear indication that you are connected in the lower
left corner.
And I think that's very helpful to preventing anyone, including myself, from getting lost,
from not knowing which box you are at.
And I did play around with multiple boxes.
And at some point, I had to rely on that indicator to know, oh, I'm still using that one.
Let me swap to the next one, and so on.
And then one other part that I find really helpful is the automated port forwarding,
which means that you can have different types of applications and the hosts being forward
to the specific ports.
For me, that I'm not used to assigning the ports myself.
That's just generally really helpful.
You can run, as usual, the Shiny apps and so on.
You can still run the Shiny app within Positron with the automated port forwarding, even when
you are inside a box.
And lastly, there's the kernel supervisor, which is useful for very long running sessions,
which means that you can shut down Positron, but still have the remote SSH running in the
background.
Yeah.
So with that, I'm gonna show a little bit about how the data looks like.
For anyone who is curious.
I did put on my GitHub as well.
Okay.
So let me show here.
With your GitHub, can you get rid of the console?
Yeah.
I think...
Wait.
If I go back to the presentation...
Let me go back to...
Just a second.
Yeah.
Here we go.
Yes.
So I put the repo here in my GitHub for everyone to see the...
Of course, I didn't put the data.
Because...
Yeah.
But the script that I use both to fetch all the sites as well as to capture the data for
each state, the parquet partitions, it's all there.
Okay, cool.
So I wanted to show here the...
Yeah.
So that's the parquet files for three years for each state.
And one thing I would like to emphasize here is if I go on to, for example, Pennsylvania.
That's how the data looks like.
And again, this is after collecting the sites.
All the sites and numbers.
We can see here that we have the site number.
It's all the same.
To collect that site number, as I showed before, first I run the fetch.py.
And then I went ahead to the...
I created this parquet file with all sites.
And then based on those numbers, I went on to each state.
So if I go on here, for example, for Pennsylvania.
Let me just hide some.
The activity bar and the primary site bar.
Okay, cool.
I can show that.
Let me zoom out.
So we can see here that we have over 20 million rows, eight columns.
And one thing I really like about exploring data with ThemePositor, and specifically with
that data explorer tool, is the ability to interact with your data and get to know it
better.
Because especially now with AI, it's very easy to fall into the trap of asking AI to
do things and then it messing things up.
Whereas once you are actually interacting with the data, you get to know it better.
And you can avoid some pitfalls.
One example I would show here, for example, is if we go on to filter by parameter.
So equal to...
So I'm gonna put the pH parameter, okay?
Which is 00400.
And then I can apply the filter.
And you can see here that it's quite fast.
So it's 11% of my rows were for that parameter.
And then one thing I had noted before already, but I just wanted to show, if you're interested
about the data, everyone knows the range that pH is usually assigned to.
Like up to 14 and so on.
If you go on sort ascending, for example, you can see that you have minus 99999.
Does anyone know why that pH is so negative?
Just like no data?
Yeah.
Yeah, just missing data.
They just assigned that value.
So yeah, situations like this, if you're not in close contact with your data, that's the
type of thing that AI can take on and really hallucinate.
And then let's say if you were to get the average, for example, of all of this, it would
be quite bad because there is a lot...
Like we can keep going.
Like there's a lot of minus 9999 data.
I mean, we can even like filter it.
So let's say for value is equal to...
Then apply the filter.
So there are 11,600 rows of missing data.
Is that applied?
Because I can still filter to negative 999?
Oh, there's a different negative?
Because I still have it.
Filter to include.
Oh, to include.
Sorry.
Yeah.
And then what I find cool as well, let's say if I want to share this view with someone
so that the person can put it in a notebook or something, I can just convert to code to
like SQL, Pandas, or Polars, and it can just send it to them.
So yeah.
So that type of exploration is something that I'm really interested in data science, both
through notebooks and data exploration in general, in order to enable people to, when
they use AI, they can also know what they're doing with their data and so on.
Any questions up to this point?
This is the Data Explorer?
Positron Data Explorer?
Yes.
It's the Data Explorer within Positron.
You don't need to install anything.
It's already native.
It works with Pandas, Polars, DataFrames, like anything pretty much.
Any other questions here?
Yeah.
You mentioned, I think in the earlier talk on Positron, mentioned that it's like a fork
of VS Code.
Yes.
Right?
And VS Code already has remote SSH.
I use it all the time at work.
How much did you have to kind of modify when you're developing Positron?
Is it kind of just basically a wrapper on the existing logic?
What changes did you guys have to make?
So he was asking about the changes that we had to make to enable remote SSH in Positron.
I joined Positron in April.
So to be honest, I don't know all the details of the work that went behind it.
One thing that I would mention, though, that using remote SSH, and I will mention actually
someone who did the implementation, and I'm happy to put in touch with him, but one thing
that I enjoy about remote SSH in Positron is the ability to use it within your usual
workflow of data exploration.
So you don't need to swap between different applications or different things or install
extensions or any of that.
It's just already there, native, and all batteries included and so on.
Yeah.
Sorry, I don't know the very specific details.
Any other questions?
Okay, so moving back to the slides.
So in terms of the results of some exploration that I did for the three-year data collection,
the ones in asterisk are ones that the speeds of the runtime were estimated, actually.
I actually didn't do them.
But I tried to use a machine that performance is about the same as my laptop, as a baseline,
as well as some stronger, like higher computing capabilities virtual machines.
And I essentially did the same task and recorded how long it took for each of the remote hosts.
And I could get up to this point of reducing from seven to one minutes, that's how long
it took in my laptop, to 33 minutes, so by half, essentially, the time.
Here are the costs, hourly cost, total cost per full run.
Of course, usually you run into issues when you are doing it.
Sometimes something might stop working and so on.
So I wouldn't budget based on how long something would take to, you expect something to run.
But it's a good indicator, essentially.
And the reason why I also stopped here is because once you start getting to a certain
point, it doesn't really matter that much anymore what your computing capabilities are,
because you might get rate-limited by the API and so on, and you don't want to stress
the server or any of that.
So it becomes less of a concern of your infrastructure that you're using, more of a concern of the
external, the server infrastructure of the API provider.
So yeah, and then in terms of when I think of processing 30 years of data, for example,
I don't know what the results would look like, but it's very likely that that difference
between my laptop versus more powerful machines would be very stark.
The machines that I was using was from AWS, but there are a lot of virtual machine providers
that can be good for that type of exploration.
And again, taking advantage of the free trials, I think that that can be a really good opportunity
for anyone interested in outgrowing their laptop with remote SSH.
Any questions about this part?
Yeah.
I have a question, but just a remark.
Not that I'm affiliated with them, but there is a company called Hyperparam that actually
also has an open source JavaScript library that you can directly feed parquet files into
your browser.
They re-implemented some of the compression and things like that.
So it's worthwhile to take a look at them.
What is the name?
It's called Hyperparam.
I can...
Hyperparam.
Yeah.
Okay.
Cool.
And then, yeah.
So just a few remarks to conclude the presentation.
First, as shown here, remote SSH in Positron can help with any projects related to mass
scale data collection, storage, and processing.
It's very useful to do so because in this way, users or any data scientists or data
enthusiasts can take advantage of very powerful remote machines while remaining within the
data science focused ID environment.
And in general, I'm really excited about building data science and open source tools that can
help us understand and improve the world in some way.
So that's part of the reason why I'm really excited about Positron and ID development
in general.
And just as in my presentations, I always like to thank people who helped me throughout
the process.
I'm not a remote SSH expert, but he is an expert in remote SSH.
He's one of my coworkers.
And he gave a talk at PositConf about outgrowing your laptop with Positron.
If anyone is interested and wants to know more details about remote SSH, you're welcome
to check.
It's on YouTube.
And I would also like to thank the United States Geological Survey employees who have
been doing a lot of heavy lifting to preserve the much needed resources that exist for those
API endpoints and so on.
of the much-needed resources that exist for those API endpoints and so on.
And again, if you are interested, feel free to fork, to clone the repo, to try it out,
to collect some data from their API, because again, maybe next year some of the endpoints
I used won't be available anymore, so maybe it's the last chance we have to do so, which
makes it even more urgent and interesting.
And with that, I want to thank everyone for listening.
Let's keep in touch here, my contact information, and again, I'm really interested in tools
and data science with a focus on a better world, so if anyone is interested in those
type of topics and projects, please contact me, and if you have any issues with positron
or remote SH, also please feel free to reach out, and I'm happy to help.
So any other questions?
Yes?
Have you made any interesting observations from that data you collected, maybe any visualizations?
Yes, so I had done a blog post in the past with some visualizations showing.
What I noticed with temperature, for example, there is a lot of seasonality and so on, that's
very expected.
Two of the variables were correlated, which I found interesting as well.
I can send it to the blog post after, I think that would be the most helpful, yeah.
I had the same question.
I just wondered whether, like what stories you maybe got out of that, you know, the data
and exploring it.
Is there something that got you into reverse, like something in your life that happened
that made you interested in this?
Oh, okay.
So yeah, so it's, when I was in high school, I was studying some differential equation
for modeling pollution, and that differential equation is the Streeter-Phelps equation.
It's modeled after the Ohio River, by pure coincidence.
Years later, I moved to Pittsburgh, and I was like, oh, this is the Ohio River, the
famous Ohio River.
No one knew about that, but I was always like, oh, the Streeter-Phelps equation was modeled
after this river.
So that's kind of what made me feel interested in that.
Thank you.
Oh, thank you very much.